# It can't be that hard, right?
### A talk about dedication, inspiration and routine
Given at #pysthlm meetup #17: Wednesday, May 7, 2014

---

Hi! My name is Lowe, and I am a developer at Spotify. For a long while, I've
been very interested in what makes us want to develop things and how we can use
that to become better developers. To this end, I have been experimenting a lot
over the last year, and now I want to share the observations I've had.

I want to talk about three topics, and all of them will somehow relate to the
innuendo-laden question "It can't be that hard, right?". The three topics are:

* Dedication
* Inspiration
* Routine

In the context of this talk, these three all relate. More importantly,
I believe that dedication is a goal that you can reach with a combination of
inspiration and routine. All three lead to the other in some way.

## Dedication

So, what do I mean when I talk about "dedication"? To me, it's about the
dedication to always want to become a better developer and to always strive to
evolve your skills. And why would one want that? It could be many things, but
my personal favorite is probably a certain feeling that you might actually
recognize. Sometimes when you find a new brilliant tool, or something you just
wrote just fucking works exactly the way you planned it (or better), you get
this very nice feeling that I think only developers can understand, and you
just tilt your head back and go "oh, that is soooo beautiful". You might know
this feeling or something like it, right? It's like a beautiful little storm of
endorphins, and they come from what is actually pretty small things.

It's also a lot of fun to be good at stuff, especially when that "stuff" is
about creating more stuff. Developing is a form of creativity, and human beings
as ourselves get a special sort of satisfaction when creating things. However,
to create something, you need some inspiration.

## Inspiration

So, where do we get inspiration? We developers create things for different
reasons. Sometimes it's for our daily work, and when it's that, the inspiration
is usually focused around solutions to a problem you're hired to solve at work.
And, sometimes it's because you had a very great idea for something you've been
thinking about on your free time and you just want to scratch that creative
little itch.

Inspiration can happen in many ways, and regardless of how, when inspired, it's
very easy to go to the title phrase of this talk: "It can't be that hard,
right?". If you say this to someone without any hints of sarcasm, you'll
usually met with disbelief and a reply in the lines of "hells yes it can".

Developers create things. Creators overall, not just developers, usually
develop an abstract skill of thinking. This form of thinking allows one to go
from a view of a problem to a suggested solution very quickly. Or, in the case
of art forms like painting, go from nothing to vision of creation equally
quickly. When one quickly goes from the very beginning of a workflow to
a vision of the finished creation, it's very simple to underestimate the length
of the road between start and finish.

So, in a sense, I agree with the disbeliever saying "yes, it can be that
hard". After a couple of years of being a developer, I've realized that the
road to the finish can be very long, if not infinite. I mean, how many of us
have actually been literally **done** with a project? To add to this, that road
is not only paved with good intentions; it's also paved with unforeseen errors
during development as well as lots and lots of Exceptions. Therefore, I think
that the "It can't be that hard" mindset can be seen as a form of naivety.

To relate back to actual naivety in my younger days, I did something of the
sorts during math classes. I took pretty much every math class possible up
until the end of high school, and all my math teachers concluded that I only
had one real issue as a math student; Whenever I saw a problem, I solved it all
in my head and just stated the solution. My teachers then tried to explain that
I needed to state all my steps so that they could follow my train of thought
and that the steps are even more important than the answer. As the rebellious
little shit I was (and to some extent still am &lt;3) I answered with "Well,
I got the solution. Why would you need anything else?" and then reluctantly did
all the steps needed.

I have since realized that my approach was poor and naive, and I am thankful
for the fact that my teachers were adamant that my workflow was bad. Still,
this naivety stuck with me, and when I started to develop software, I was back
at square one again.

But, I also defend this Developer Naïveté. It's not all bad. To the contrary,
I find it really useful! Based on my own experiences and my half decade of
working with developers, I've observed that we reach really intense levels of
productivity when we have the creative sparks generated by this naivety. So,
while I agree that it is bad to disregard the amount of work needed to go from
problem to solution, I think it is worse to undoubtedly quench these sparks and
disregard them as naive.

Instead of that, I'd recommend recognizing this and embracing the possibility
that letting the developer work on her ideas for a while might give a boost in
productivity. There is still some chances that the idea actually is genuinely
naive and troublesome, but I've seen and experienced too much instant dismissal
that I can't help but be worried. Getting these sparks dismissed enough times,
the developer will eventually stop having them and might lose the connection to
one of the most valuable feelings about being a developer; the feeling of
creativity.

However, this kind of dismissal can also have the complete opposite effect.
I overheard a conversation from one of the tech leads at Spotify saying "Well,
whatever you do, do *not* build a new build system. That would be the absolute
worst thing to do at any given time at all!". So, naturally, I went home and
started to build a new build system, because you can't tell me what I can't do!

In all seriousness though, the point I am trying to get across is that it is
important to recognize when someone is inspired and is presenting an idea, and
try to help that person by discussing that idea. Not with dismissal, but with
an open mind and with constructive criticism.

So, that's about keeping and defending inspiration, but where do you actually
*get* it from? This segues nicely into...

## Routine

Last October I read [a blog post about 177 days of GitHub][177]. It outlines
the idea that you should strive to contribute something to an Open Source
project every day. It doesn't need to be much, just 20 minutes of writing
a small patch or reporting an issue will count. The goal of this idea is to get
into the habit of contributing every day and keeping that up by developing the
mindset of not wanting to break the chain.

This really piqued my interest, so I set out to do it. When I started, I was
notoriously bad at habits and actually getting shit done, so I thought that
maybe I could change that whilst getting a chance to give back to the beautiful
world of Open Source Software. And I did. I even got to the point where
I myself could write a blog post called "177 days of GitHub", where I boasted
about how well I had done. I did almost 900 commits and contributed to 11
projects that were not my own. Even more importantly, I started 7 new ones of
my own.

After a while of doing the contributions, I started to feel very inspired.
Because I was exercising my mind in contributing to non-work things every day,
my creative muscles started to flex a bit. Not only did I start new projects,
but I also felt like doing things I had never done before. So, I tried golang,
which by the by is an awesome language that actually deserves at least part of
the hype it is getting. I also got this fix idea to try network programming for
some reason. I had no idea of how to do any kind of that, but I wanted to make
some kind of Celery-like thing, but with no central broker. As an aside, if you
ever feel that normal programming isn't infuriating enough, try network
programming. Network code always finds a way to die in the most inexplicable
ways, and after a while it feels like it's literally just mocking you. No
matter really, but what happened was that I was actually feeling a positive
effect from doing this contribution; I was getting more inspired than ever
before.

Unfortunately, irony was abound! Just two days after being glad for passing 177
days and excited to make it through a full year of contributions to Github,
I failed. I missed my 24 hour window because of reasons, and my streak was
broken. This was a harder hit than I thought, and I was actually very sad about
my failure. I took a month of vacation from the hard routine, and then I had
a little retrospective of how I'd done. I celebrated all the good things I just
mentioned, but I also realized that I was starting more than I finished.
I mean, many moons and 200 commits later, my network project still kinda can't
send messages properly. Only one of the projects that I started ever really
made it out from the dreaded beta land, so when I restarted my spree about
a month ago, I tried to make sure to stop starting stuff and start finishing
them.

And this segues beautifully back into...

## Conclusion

...dedication. After kind of completing my initial contribution experiment,
I found new ways to improve myself as a developer and as a person. I will
strive to continuously do so, and I hope that I have inspired you in some way
to do something like it. Be inspired to do something, create a routine to do
it, and be dedicated enough to keep doing it. And most importantly, remember to
develop because it's so much fun!

I conclude this talk with a quote from my favorite TV dad:
"Success is 1% inspiration, 98% perspiration, and 2% attention to detail."
- Phil Dunphy, Modern Family

Any questions?
Because of the nature of this talk, I would like to hold an Open Space about
this topic later on this evening.

Thank you.
